## For loops: elements vs indexes

In previous theory pages we've explained about the different types of loops, and when to use them. Something that you might have found since then is that there are two methods in which you could use a for-loop; by element, or by index. On this page we will discuss when to use which method and why.

Consider the following list:

```
l = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
```

We can print every element in the list using either of the following two design patterns:

    for i in l:
        print(i)

    for i in range(len(l)):
        print(l[i])

The first loop iterates over `l` printing one element at the time. We call this _iteration by element_. This kind of loop is very useful for accessing the separate elements in a sequence, when the indexes of these elements are not required. Once the element has been taken from the list, it is not possible to find the index in the list it was taken from.

The second loop iterates over the numbers generated by the `range` function, producing indexes that can be used to find the corresponding elements in the list. We call this _iteration by index_. Using `range` in for-loops is useful for iterating over a sequence a specific number of times, but also when you would like to iterate over a specific set of indices of a list.

Of these two design patterns, for the example above, iterating by element is the preferred method. The code for this method is easier to read and understand, and requires less effort from the programmer. It is generally considered to be more _pythonic_.

> _Pythonic_ describes a coding style that leverages Python's unique features to write code that is both readable and beautiful.

### When do we choose which?

There are some situations where it is better to use iteration by index, and there are situations where purely iterating by element will result in very complex code. Generally, whenever you would need an index, or when you would like to "track" the position you are at in a list, you would use iteration by index instead of iteration by element.

An example of such a situation is when you have multiple lists that you would like to iterate over at the same time. Lets consider the following: we live in a home with multiple other students, and want to find the last time one of our roommates, Dirk, has done the dishes. We diligently keep two lists, one with the dates on which the dishes were done, and another with the name of the person that has done the dishes:

    dates = ['September 21st', 'September 23rd', 'September 24th', 'September 26th', 'September 29th', 'October 1st', 'October 2nd', 'October 4th']
    names = ['Mark', 'Betty', 'Dirk', 'Betty', 'Mark', 'Mark', 'Dirk', 'Betty']

While it is possible to do this specific task using iteration by element (as shown in the spoiler at the bottom of the page), it is easier to use iteration by index:

    last_date = None
    for i in range(len(dates)):
      date = dates[i]
      name = names[i]

      if name == 'Dirk':
        last_date = date

    print(last_date)

This loop will go over each possible name and check whether it is Dirk. When it is, the corresponding date is saved in the variable `last_date`. If `last_date` contained a value it is overwritten, and as such only the last date on which Dirk has done the dishes is saved.

> You might notice that this code can be made more compact by replacing `name` and `date` with `names[i]` and `dates[i]``. We have opted not to do this as we might need the date and name multiple times in the loop. While the code is a bit longer than necessary, it is also easy to understand.

Ultimately, the choice between iterating by element or by index depends on the problem you are trying to solve. A simple rule of thumb is to always use the iteration by index, unless you are absolutely sure that you do not need _the index_ of each of the elements.

<details markdown="1"><summary  markdown="span">Iteration by element solution to finding Dirk's last dishwashing date</summary>
    index = 0

    for name in names:
      if name == 'Dirk':
        date = dates[index]
        last_date = date
      index += 1

    print(last_date)

As you can see this solution requires you to introduce some form of counter. This is sensitive to mistakes, as the location of the line where `index` is increased is crucial to the correct functioning of the code. The version of this code where iteration by index is used is easier to understand, and as such is preferred.
</details>
